-------------------------
	Chapter 4
-------------------------

using autoglobals
	2 most common ways that php interfaces with the user is by accessiing values from fill-in forms that are submitted to a php script by handling events 
	such as dynamically displaying pages when the user clicks a hyperlinks. The data needs to process these interactions is stored in php auto globals.

	Auto globals are associative arrays which are arrays whos elements referred to with an alphanumeric key instead of an index number.
	Environmental variables that programs use to interact with the system. $_env the elements in the $_ENV change depending on the operating system and machine config.
	$_SERVER[] - contains info about the web server and php scripting engine
	$_ENV	- Contains information about the environtment. Programs use to interact with the system.

Building html web forms
	Interactive controls that allow users to enter data in text input boxes Web forms provice methods for electronically submitting the 
`	form data entered by a user to the program onthe server to process input.
	Web forms are used when ever server requires user input.eg order processing, billing, subscribing to email to newsletter, searching web forms
	web forms are standard html page. only diff is the web form requires form tag and the markup contains controlls.

adding action attribute
	form opening tag requires an action attribute the value identies the program on the server that will process the form data when submitted. php often used to process form data.

adding method attribute
	opening form tag must also contain a method attribute which defines how the form data is submitted to the server.
	method will either be post or get.
	post form data is embedded in the request message. 
	get the form data is appended to the url specified in the forms action attribute
	when you click submit each field on the form is sent to the server as a key/value pair. 
	when post is used the name portion of the name/value pair becomes the key and the index of the element in the post array and the value is assigned as the value of the array element.
	when get is used the same happens except the name portion of the name/value pair gecomes the key of an element in the get array.
	the get method to submit form data to the processing script the form data is appended to the url specified by the action attribute. name/value pair is appended to the end of the url called url tokens.
	the form is separated by a ? mark and each individual element is separated by a & and the element name is separated from the value by an equal sign =
	spaces in the name and value field are encoded as a + and all other chars except letters numbers - _ and . are encoded using a % sign followed by the 2 digit hex representaion of the chars ascii value
	Get method is useful as a debugging technique because it allows you to see the names and values being sent to the webserver.
	Get method is also useful for creating static links to a dynamic server process.

Processing Form Data
	Second part of the procedure for using webforms is processing the form data once it is submitted. This is done in a form handler. a script/program that processes the information submitted from a web form.
	the form handler includes code for verifying that the user entered the minimum amount of data needed to process the form. validating data entry and performing any tasks needed for the data submitted.

retrieving submitted data
	once form is submitted fnale lname and submit are assigned to the keys in the post autoglobal array. and values entered become the values

handeling special characters
	addslashes() function accepts single argument representing the text string you want to escape and returns a string containing the scaped string.
	stripslashes() - removes any slashes that occur before a single ' quote double " or a null char. Good to use

how to correctly handle a form.
1	determine if the form variables contain values you can use empty() for this if the variable has a nonempty or nonzero value. it is true if variable has an empty " " or zero value
2	validate user input. validate numeric data.  check if numeric is_numeric() can.
	validate strings trim() and stripslashes()
	Best way is to record the error usually in an array and continue processing the form. users can then go back and correct the errors once 
	
	using a sticky form is better than the former. as it makes it easier for the user to fill in information

emailing the web form
	mail(recipient(s), subject,message) - value assigned to the recipien(s) argument is a string of one or more email addresses in standard format for an address specifier.
	address specifiers are the pain e-mail address and the recipients name followed by the email address in eg <js@gmail.com>
	subject field is a text string that apears as the subject field of the email. should be plan text with no tags
	message field plain text.
	additional header arguements can include from cc bcc date header. each header needs to be on its own line. like start with header name followed by a : a space ad the header element value eg Date: friday,03 apri 2009 16:05:50 -500
	mail() function returns true if message was sent successfully or false if not.

	$to = "webmaster@example.edu";
	$Subject = "Message from the web form";
	$message = $formMessage;
	$Headers = "From: $fname $lname <$emailAddress>";
	mail ($to, $subject, $Message, $headers);

creating an all in one form
	if you have a large form with many fields and if form needs intensive processing you ant to separate it. A we have been doing it it is called a two-part form.
	All in one form a single script uised to display web for and process its data. when the user clicks the submit button the script submits the form data to the current script. 
	you then use validation codes to check if the data exists when the page is first dispalyed.

validating all in one form
	an all in one uses an if condition to determine if data has been submitted frm the web form or if the web page has been viewed for the first time
	isset() - can be used to determine if the $_POST["submit"] has been set. (if the submit btn was pressed)
	
Displaying dynamic content based on a URL Token
	unlike post method the get method is ideal for embedding options in a hyperlink.
	by passing url tokens to a php script many different types of info can be displayed from the same script. Web page templates can have an additional advantage of giving all of the pages consistent user interfaces.

	using web page template
		the structure of a php powered website is often developed using a template. a single web page that is divided into sections .
		using the include function to include header footer and other re accuring elements. You can use a web page template with a dynamic content section that will change but the content and layout of the static sections will not

	Navigating within a template
		you can navigate using hyperlinks and buttons. just as you can with static pages but there are some minor differences. When using text hyperlinsk to navigate within a web page template, the values that specify which dynamic ontent to show my be
		appended to the filename in the href attrubute of the anchor tag. You use the notation for the get method discussed earlier in this chapter. with a ? at the end of the url.
		eg <a href= "index.php?page=home_page">Home<\a>
	img buttons
		<input type="image" src="home.jpg" name="home" style="border:0 alt="Home">
		form image btns dont pass a value. They will pass a x and y coordinate from the form
		it will come out as $_POST["Button.x"] and $_POST["Button.y"] the array will have 2 elements


summary on pg 218
